xxxiv [wnnouucwon

it is sometimes unguarded. Generally, he describes the ’

relationship oi the Son to the Father by such terms as
s ‘oboedientia' ‘subditus’ ‘subiectus' ‘ministen’ ‘angelus’
and ‘minor patret The writer, in his desire to contro-
vert the Sabellian confusion oi Persons in the Godhead
(according to which ‘Filius Dei’ and ‘Deus Pater’ were
not equal, but identical)‚ fails to emphasise their trans-
cendental equality. And yet even the expression ‘minor
Patte' has the highest Authority‚ and may signify
precedence not in essence but in personalityt

lt would be well ii theologians had always remern-
bered‚ in discussing the rnysteries oi the Divine Nature,
that the ternis and the logical processes, through which
alone the subject can be presented, are human and ipso v
sacto inadequate. In this question of the subordination
oi the Son to the Alrnighty Father who is the ‘ Fount of
Deity³‚' the significant fact is that of obedience, the iulfil-
ment oi the Divine Will ; and it is probable that the
thought of inferiority, which inan cannot but associate
with that of service, is utterly alien from the thought oi
the Divine Mind. in the Divine Life there may be an
interchange of energy oi which the conditions are but ’
ditnly discernibie to us through the hints of revelation.
it has already been remarhed that inieriority in the sense
oi posteriority in time does not enter into the writer¹s
conception of the subordination of the Son. He exalts
the Son iar above all created existences. It may indeed

¹ c. xxvii, p 99, lh 13, 14, ‘dum ergo accipit sanctificationem a patre,
minor patre est’: other reti> pp. 58, 15 ; 64, 16, 173 81, 10-16; 96, 10 sq.
and note, xxviii, p. 103, 25 n., xxnipursz'w esp. p. 117. 5—p. 118. 5λ

2 Hamack, like many others, credits Nov- with the doctrine that the
Son when His worh is finished will cease to exist independently, but there
is nothing in c. xxxi (to which he refers) to justify this. Cp. n. on xxxi,
p. 122, l. 12.

³ πηγὴ θεότητος Origen.

 

