xvi rnrrrooocrronr

rests on the testimony of his rival, that iu time of perse·
cution he went into retirement, and when implorcd by p
the deacons to bring comfort to his suffering brethren,

“ replied that he wished to be a presbyter no longer and'
was a lover of a different philosophy1. Possibly he Ἴ

’ was more zealons in theological study than in the suitil-

ment of the pastoral office. Socrates has a tradition
that he suffered as a martyr in the persecution ofValerian
(after AD. 2 57),

Novatian is not the only instance which Church
history furnishes ol a man oi undoubted spirituality
and high intellectual endowments, in whom some one
. austere or even morbid conviction, gaining impetus from
an autocratic temper, lias overborne the larger principles
oi charity and Catholicityt We may regret that Cor-
nelius could characterise a learned sellow- Christi tran as a

Qandmalrgnant creature’ But when the same
writ er treiers to him rronrcll] the same letter ast ‘this

marvellous manss ‘the brilliant ‘the dogmatist, the
champion of ecclesiasticalr science,’ ‘the vindicator of
the Gospel³,' he preserves ior us, unintentionally‚ the
encomiums which >the admirers of the schismatic
lavished upon him. The rare culture and eloquence
¹ os Novatian could not be denied, bnt it was easy to
accuse him oi being a‘bptter philosopher than Christian&

1 Cornel. up. Eusebio

2 ‘nec'hatemam caritatem nec ecclesiasticam unitatem tenuit’ [Cypr. ud ,
Aaron. in Migne iii, col. 815).

³ cornel. od Fan Arrtioclr. α’ (Migne iii 761)v rui δολερῷ καὶ κακοήθει
θηρίῳ. Ib. passim ttunntnn orlrnnd λαμπρότατος, ὁ δογμαπισπὴςῑό τῆς
ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ἐπιστήμης ὑπερασπιστὴς, d ἐκδικητὴς τοῦ εὐαγγελίου.

4 ‘quisquis ille est ct qualiscumque est, Christianus non est quiin Christi
ecclesia nonest. Iactet se licet et philosophiam vel eloquentiam sunm
superbis uocibus praedicet,' etc. (Cypr. od Aaron„ Migne iii 815l: ‘inter
Christianos et philosophos plurimum distat’ (ih. col. Soylz ‘in perniciem
fratrum lingua sua perstrepens, et facundiae uenenatae iacula contorquens,

 

