XXXI]

DE T RINITA TE LIBER

117

Hic ergo, cum sit genitus epatre, semper est in patre.
semper autem sic dico, utnon innatum, sed natum probem.
sed quiante omne tempus est, semper in patre fuisse di-
cendus est: nec enirn tempus illi assignari potest, quiante
tempus est. semper enim in patre, ne pater non semper sits
pater. quia et pater illum etiam praecedit⁷ quod necesse est
prior sit, qua pater sit: quoniam antecedat necesse est eum,

6 quia a: quin al.
prior: aliquo pacto antecedat G y.

’ 1. hio ergo cnm sit genuus squ]
Generation from the Father implies¹
N. says¹ that the Son was always in
the h‘ather. This step in the argu-
ment he does not explaim but pro-
bably he means that sucha relation-
ship, in the case of the Diviue Being,
must necessarily he eternal.

a. semper autem sic sq.] N.
must wish to cornhat one of two
errors. As the Son is always in the
Father, it might be thought that
His birth had not already taken
place, before all time. Or, for the
same reason, it might he thought
that the Son has no birth at all,
bnt has au independeut and self-
originated existence. lu the former
case, ‘innatum' would nrean ‘not
yet horn? But the use of ‘ natus' and
¹ innatus ¹ below (p. irc). 5 sq.) is con-
clusive for the latter view. N. says
therefore that this coeternal exist-
ence of the Son does not mean au
independent existence, but aderiva-
tire one3 only (sed), where ques-
tions of timeare ont of place, we
rnust say that this derived existence
has ‘always' been. a. Introd, §a
p. xxxvii.

rib. innatum] ‘urrborn‚' ‘inge-
nerata' Bp Bull (op. cit. p. 478),
while charging the writer with ‘ex-
pressiug himself in a most pcrplened
manner‚' says, ‘it is most certain that
he altogether shrunk from the [sul]-
sequent]Arianblasphemyrcspecting
the Son of God, “there was a
time when He was not¹¹ (ἦν-,ὅτε

6 sq¹ quadarn ratione praecedit: quodam modo

οὐκ ἦν).’

5. aa pateram semper cet]
This argument for the eternity of
the Son is implied in the words of
irenaeus iv ει, 5 (Haruey), in con-
nexion wilh ‘renelauerit' of illast,
xi 27 (Luhe x aa) ‘non solnm in
futurum dictum est, quasi tunc in-
ceperit nerbnm manifestare patrem,
cnm de Maria natum *sed communi-
tas per toturn ternpus positum est.
Ab initio enim assistens filius suo
plasmati reuelat omnibus patrem.¹
lt appears again in Origen Princ. i
a. ro, iy 28.

6. quia et pater eet] It is
clear that iu the supposed interests
of orthodoxy as against Arianism
some liberties have been taken with
the original text of this chapter, The
qualify'nrg phrases patariam ratione,
and in the next clause quodam niodo,
and in the following sentence aliquo

pacto before arztccedat, were wanting

iu cod. Arrgl. but interpolated (ac-
cording to Pamelius) by Gangneius.
The ed. of Gelenius reads them
without brackets. At the same time
these interpolations fairly represent
the mind of N.‚ for the whole con·
text shews that he did not intend
‘praecedit' to have a strictly tem·
poral sense. Again, the sentence
simul ut liic aristot to cautritur, and
lower down the words scd porr
Patrem, aud again post Patrem qao
Illionareduetocod.Aagl.:Gelenius

omits them. Cf, u. on p. 119. 16
helow.

 

