xxxh rwrnouucrnuu

Deity ‘ex ipsius dei substantia et ut portio aliqua
totius¹.’

Tertullian was the first to give full theologica] ualue
to the Sonship of Christ, as distinct irorn the idea of
the Logos, which taken hy itself might haue rnerged
into the theosophic fancies of. the age. He did rnuch to
define the distinction os Persons; but he failed to place
the equality of the Son upon an absolute basis. He was
satisfied to find the ground os the Trinitarian distinction
in the Godhead in the iulfihnent os, the purpose of
Creation and Redemption. The Valentinian spohe of
the προβολαί of Aeons3 and Tertullian, and Novatian
too‚'expressed the relation of the Son to the Father in
rerms (such as profore} procedere) which a later theo-

' >N logical instinct has rejectede And thus the subordination

of the Son to the Father as the source of Deity is stated
in terrns which infringe upon His equality within the

Godheadt in one passage he seerns even to deny His
pre-existence ‘fuit autern tempus, curn.,.Filius non fuit'
(udraHerrnog. iii), hut there it is the Narne rather than
the> Person that is in question. ἱ
3² Novatian is heir to the Christology of Tertullian
and must be studied in connexion with his predecessor.
l His gifts are literary rather than philosophie: those of

1 adu. Prae. xxvi: cp. ix 'pater totu substantia est, filius uero deriuatio
totius et portio’: adu. Marc. iii 6 ‘filius portio plenitudinis! vr Dorner, ’
onon ¹

2 These terms may have been suggested by the Stoic distinction between
the Logos ἐνδιάθετος and προφορικός, unspoheu thought and thought ero
pressedz u. c. xv, p. 50, li. 12—20.

³ Although Tertullian asserrs His nnity of substance. ‘They are cahed
Two, not as Gods nor as Lords, but quw Father und Son: aud that not by
separation of substance, but by disposition, when we pronounce the Son
indiuiduam et separatum epatre, nec statu sed gradu alinru': and below,
‘One God, from the very fact that He is to be called God in virtue of
His unitynwith the Father‚’ ndu. Prux. xix.

 

 

 

