suracuucrroru xli

out of the iulness of an inspired experience, individual
and yet gained in the community1. () At the same
time we ,dare not hastily abandon the underlying pos-
tulates of the Christian saith, which were established
beyond further dispute by the controversies of an age
rich in subtle intellects to whose gift for metaphysica}
speculation the Western mind of to-day rarely attains.
And to those who believe in the Divine guidance of the
Church such an abandonment is not open. (d) We must
always distinguish between first principles and deduc-
tions. In the case of the latter, human irnperiection
must quality the effort to express Divine mysteries in
human languaget For example, we may take the
application of the word ‘Son’ to the Fre-incarnare.
‘The only passage in the ΝΤ. which goes wholly and
obviously behind the fact of lncarnation drops altogether
the words Father and Sorn’ frorn which the thoughts
of priority and subordination are inseparable, Hence
Marcellus of Ancyra, prominent in the refutation of
Arius, held that the Logos is only called Son as a
result of the lncarnation. But Marcellus went too iar
in thereby denying the perrona! pre-existence of the
Logos. The fact is, that we cannot understand much
about the eternal relations within the Being of Deity.
lt is in the light of the lncarnation as the supreme
Theophany that the Christian student must think of the

’ 1¹ Cp. Bp Gore¹ Ba. (1891) p. ιρι ‘it is important to notice that there
is no moment when Jesus Christ expressly reveals this doctrine [the
Trinity]. [t auur overheard rather than heard? η

Ε Cf. ιι. ou ‘Person,’ p. lxii.

3 Moberly, Atorzrmrrrt aad Persrnality, p. 214. Cf. words of Marcellus
quoted ib. ιιι from Euseb. Eccl. Theoi. 1- xviii, p. 864 εἴτε γὰρ Ἰησοῦ,
εἴτε Χριστοῦ ὀνόματος μνημονεύω ἡ teta γραφή, τὸν μετὰ τῆς ἀνθρωπίνου ὄντα
σαρκὸς τοῦ θεοῦ Λόγον ὀνομάζειν φαίνεται, εἰ w ru rel τρὸ aas Νέαν hrodbrat
τοῦ Χριστοῦ [ἢ τοῦ] Mod ὄνομα τῴ Λόγῳ μόνῳ δεικνύναι δύνασθαι ἐπαγγέλλοιτο,
εὑρήσει τοῦτο προφητικῶς εἰρημένον,

 

