iixiv rucconucrr'ow

posterity‚ was due to the happy accident which con-
nected it (os jerome’s allusion shews) with the works
of Tertullinn¹⁸ Under that illustrious name it suruived;
and although no extant urs of Tertullian contains it2, it
was printed in early editions of thot father, the first
being that of J. Gangneius, Paris, 1545, who (according
to Pameliusg a later editor) based his text on a MS in the
possession of Politianus. This edition of Gangneius
does not appear to have had a separate existence of its
own, but to haye formed part of the 1545 edition of
B. Rhenanus’ Tertullian (GuillardsParis), which is to
be found in the British Museum. lu this-not on the
title page, but in the middle of his ‘catologus operum
Tertulliani—Rhenanus says that this ueause, along
with others ore here published for the first time, by the
good offices of Gangneius³.

The next edition is that of Sigismund Gelenius,

published by Froben at Basel in 15504, which ‘professes
to rely lorgely on a MS formerly belonging to on
English monastery which Gelenius calls ‘coenobium ’
hiasburense,' lent to him by John Leland the antiquary⁵: ’

- ⁴ 1 Similnrly the de cibis Iudaicis connects with Tertull. dedicandoque
ruminandis Animalibus. y

² The de Cir, Iudaicis euists iu one MS in the Imperial Librsry at
Petersburg‚ under the title of Tertullian.

3 After the twenty·two titles of Tertullian's known writings we read as
follows :—‘ Haec vero sequentia opuscula nunc primurn eduntur in lucem

5 beneficio Jounnis Gangneii Parisini theologi et Christianissimi Gallianrm

regis primi eleemosynarii: ex vetustissimo cod. desumpta?
⁴ ‘Q Sept Flor· Tertull. ad complures veteres e Gallicanis Gemranis-

que bibliothecis conquisitos recognita codd. in quibus praecipuus fult unus Ἰ
longe Incorruptissimus iri-ultimum usque petitus Britanniam) s

. ⁵ Who nce. to Pref. of Gelenius' ed. of 1562, ‘communicavit exemplar
in Musburensi coenobio gentis eius vetustissimo repertum! [Dugdale's
index of Monsstic houses knows none so named: a friend suggests
‘Malvu1·ensi‚' ‘of Mulvern! Malnresbury is also suggested] See Lupton's
edition of Tertullisu de saprum, p. xxxvi. “

 

