N‘OVATIANI

PRESBYTERI ROMANI

DE TRINITATE LIBER

1 Ι. Regula exigit ueritatis ut primo omnium credamus in
‘deam patrem et dominum omnipotentem, id est, rerum

TaaRaaaoiTauaa. Fjrsppllff, mula and certainly much shorter
than the later reeension known to

Ι. ‘I helirae ia God the Faraor us as the ‘Apostles' Creed! Con·
Almiglaty, Moker of aaaron aad sult Hamach, Tae Apostles¹ Croed,
eorth': roho nat aaly created bat c. ii [translated from article in
gova tham their proper ordor arod Hamis-Herzog, maharai), and
caratr'taera elaaaas. To soa aad Swete’saipostlos’ Croesi-p. 14, The
[aaa He gava a lara arrico taor Creed appears in Tertiillian ina
should observo, as arr orariola to fullerform, with eertainEastern ele-
marr. Ha made azan ia His oron ments (arratam Deum,⁷‘secundum
z'raage; the alaazeats of ais body arr scripturas ¹), in the treatises odo.
earthly, ora tlaere roas a Divina Praxean ii, dr Virg. Vel. i, a'e
irrbrralhirogm‘r'easorr ardorello· Praescr. Haeret. xiii, xxxvi: it
gance. Marraloaeroas created a free is called by him ‘regula fidei ima
agant: brot lostfrea will should break omnino, seia immobilis et irreforma-
r'ts bouada, Goa' garo hira a law, bilis’ (v. Lumby, Hr'st. of Crerds,
r'rr tha form of a particular carro· ch. i). So Aug. Corafiss. viii 30
rrzarrd. Dr'sobedr'orrco brozaglat death (aher his conversioni uses the ex-
irrta ilar world f brat Gool toraprrs aaa pressiora ‘stans in ea regula fidei'
¹ penalty by crarsa‘ag aar marr aaa hr's Thus regala represents κανών of
loborrs, arrd aar'tlalrola'r'ng ara r'raraor- Gal. vi 16 3 alike the ⁴ mle os mith'
tality os gaila oohile He gr'oes arpa and ‘aule of saith? sometimes called
through Christ. Thero r's a region the ‘mie of the Charch,' which de·
abore tlarfirraaoreat, r'a which dooall termines the form of her corporate
ilar Arrgolsl: aad a rogioa below thr life and is (in the Creeds) her corpo·
carra, in rolaialo tarsoals ofjrrst arrd rate uiierance. The modern con·
aajaat aroaitfiroaljudgrrart. trast of ‘forms' aith ‘saith' or ‘life’

Ι. regula. pensatis] TheCreed, to the disparagement of the former,
as it existed in the Roman Church- rests on a misapprehension of mis
of Novahan’s day, is paraphrased in idea. Cp. Westcott, Caaoa of Ν.Τ.
these opening words andin those of App. A. (See Introd. p. xxvi.)
chaps.ixandxxixzheingitselffin a. deum peiorem eh dominum
this its earliest form) scarcely more omnipotentem] Hamack (op. cit.
elaborate than the Baptismal For· p. γε) states that in the Roman

F. N· ' 1

im

 

