Jurnouucrrou xxxi

study of the question ‘ cur Deus homo?’; and a study of
the incarnation furnished a much-needed correction to
the pantheistic tenets of Valentinus and his followers,
and to the docetic vietus of Marcion.

We cannot here do more thanindicate the salient
points in Tertullian's Christology. The Son of Goel,
the Word, is not a mere attribute of the Father, such
as His wisdom or poucr3 His generation is before the
creation of the world. His Sonship is threefold: the
Word eternally in God¹; the Second Person coming
forth in the act of creation ; the Son become Man, a
visible Personality over against God2. A docetic Christ Ἰ
could not have atoned ior our sins, and the ‘oeconomia' ’ᾗ '¹
of salvetion demands that the Son should act on earth in l
the Father's namet. Thus the Son is very Man, and is
distinguished from the rather, though ol one substance
with Hirn and with the Spirit. Tertullian's favourite
illustrationis thatol the sun and its light: ‘even a ray
of the sun considered by itself l call sun, but I do not
therefore proceed to designate the sun, whose is the ray,
Rayt’ There is ‘distinction’ but not ‘diversity⁵.'
He can even speah of the Son as a ‘portio’ ol

1Tertull. adm Prae. v ‘aute omnia deus erat solus...solus autem,
quia nihil aliud extrinsecus praeter illum. ceterum ue tunc quidem solus,
habehat enim secum, quam habebat in semetipso, rationem suam scilicet.
quae ratio¹ sensus ipsius est. hanc Graeci λόγον dicuut.¹
² Consult Domer, Doctrine of Person of Christ (Eng. tn] 1 ii pp. 58;
68¹ 69: and Tert. adra. Prae. xiv ‘consequens erit ut inuisibilem patrem
intellegamus pro plenitudine maiestatis, uisibilem uero filium agnoscamus
pro modulo deriuationis’: also adra. Prae. v, vi, vii passim: viii init,
on the προβολή which, though a Valentinian term, he adopts. Ἰ
³adu. Marc. iii 8 ‘sic nee passiones Christi eius fidem merebuntur: ψ]
nihil enim passus est quinon uere est passus. uere autem pati phantasma ¹
non potuit. euersum est igitur totum dei opus)
⁴ odic. Prae. xiii.
⁵ib.ix.

 

