ewraoouerrorv ‘xvii =

and his scholarship would have commanded more re-
spect at Alexandria than it could at Rome and Carthago. .
Moreover, Roman Stoicism, even as we have it in
Seneca, with whom Βῐθιιιιιειιι1 finds in our writer points
of affinity‚ lached the breadth oi humanism: it is more
akinto he spiri tofCalvin han to tha osErasmus

pu TheNovatianist tschism wasarevolt ΜιζςιιιιεζΜ tthe diQ
Quot againstt the doctrine o fthe Catholic Church
What tever may be thought of the conformability of
certain statements in the de T 77 777777 o tthe Nicene
standard, neither this nor any other of Novatian's works

was disallowed on account oi he erodoxy In fact ,

these treatises have been preserved solelQ on their
intmrinsic ments Βιιζ the writer has paidt the price ol
secession: a heavrer price indeed than his more eminent
precursor, a man of a kindred spirit, Tertullian. Such
oi his writings as survived, survived only under cover
ofsome other name, they are to be sought among the
’ supposititious works of Tertullian, Cyprian or Origen..
Ιιι the same way, in the fifth century some writings of
Apollinarius were ‘disseminated under the famous names
oi Athanasius Julius, and Gregory Thaumaturguse’ The
history of the de T 77'777'77te, as related in pages xxiii,
xxiv, provides the best ,example of this survival under ·
a disguise3 and m the same way, the pastoralt lett ter
known as de 6777777 7777'77'7 was hound up wit 'th the works
of Tert ullian. We know that Novatian was a prolific
= writer. Jerome mentions the following worhs of his,
in addition to the above-named: de Pascha, de Sabbeto,
de C7'777777777'se'7777, de Sacerdote, 7¹7 Oratione, de [ostentio t
(‘oi perseverance under trial ’), de Attelet He also‘

magis durus saecularis philosophiae prauitate quam sophiae dominicae
lenitate pacificus‘ (Cypr. Ep. lx 3, Migne iii 860).

1 Landgraf u. lVeyman, Nocet. de eil. Iud, p. 775. ’

2 Gore, Dissereareons, p. 153.

³ Hier. de Vir. Ill. e. 70: adding ‘multaque alia)
F. N.

 

