rarraaacrroa, lvii

made gods at the beginning, but at first men and then
godsj with a reference to Ps. lxxxii. 6 (ν. ἰν 63. 2, 3)1.
Undoubtedly there was much in Holy Scripture to
encourage such a speculation: the original account of
man made in the image ol God, the teaching about
being made ‘children oi God’ (eg. 1 John iii 1, 9),
St Peter’s words ‘partalcers oi the Divine nature2’‚
and especially the identification of the believer with

⁴ Christ in Pauline teaching. As the expectation ol an

imminent Parousia iaded from Christian minus, the idea
of a gradual and spiritual regeneration of all things—
a growth of >men into the likeness oi God—laid an
increasing hold upon thern. A vaster reach is given to
the Divine purpose implicit in the incarnation, which
is thus regarded not as a remedy only for the Fall, but
as God's original and eternal counsel in creationi
The thought of man's hinship with God and pro-
gressive Delfication uras no novelty. It may be traced
in Aristotle's words about perfect happiness: οὐ γὰρ ῂ
ἅνθρωπός ἐστιν οὕτω βιώσεται, ἀλλ’ ᾗ θεῖόν Υτι ε’ναῦτῷ
ὑπάρχει, and again, ori χρὴ ἀνθρώπινα φρονεῖν ἄνθρωπον
vr’iura...a’)llc’ ἐφ’ ὅσον ἐνδέχεται ἀθανατίζειν (llic. Etsi,
x ’7. 8) lt was a commonplace with the Stoice, who
regarded the human soul as possessing, through reason,
a special relationship to the Diuine Being.
The later Stoics use even stronger language‚ Seneca,

¹ There is a usesul note in, Hamack, D. G. i³ p. 518.

² ν. Bp Westcott, GopelafLise, c. vi: Gen. ix 6, 1 Cor. xi με Pet. i 4.

³ Consult Prof. inge, Pa'sarral adaram, p. 73, and H. Jordan, Tleal.
Ννν, p. 83 quotingv Tractat. 8.Δ 27 ‘similitudinem autem in Christo
reseruauit, per quem qui ad imaginem dei factus suerat rursus ad similitu·
dinem reformaretur in ipso,’ and Tertull. dr Bapl. v‘ita restituitur horno
deo ad similitudinem eius qui retro ad imaginem dei fuerat: imago in
effigie, similitudo in aeternitate censetur.’ (The sz'aa'limdo is something
higher thanunfallen nranhood, the imago: it is a Deification.)

 

