XXI ι INTRODUCTION

⁵ anaphora ior the balancing oi clauses See the following
l if passages, iia Tiiaitati' ii, p. 9, ll. 5-14‚ x, p. 31, rosq.
Ἴ xxix, last sentence: ep, xxxvia de Laud. Martia. iv
> aii iaia, vi ad iaia: Cib. lad. i, second sentence, and the ’ ”
fines satirieal passage in a'e Spart, v on those who could
tella horsefs pedigree for generations (memoriter totam
equini generis subolem computantes ’>, but were ignorant,
of the Gospel story. Other features are hiscorrnna'nd > =
N*of Virgilian diction1‚ and of classical prose rhyth'rn'2
especially noticeable in the clausulae oi his paragraphs,
A test of a different kind is ‘to‘be found in a study of
the quotations, which conform to the type represented
by the Old Latin versions <based on the Septuagint),
rather than· to the Hebrew text as it was afterwards
rendered in the vulgaret.

Oi the other treatises‚ the da Boua Pudicitiae, an
anonymous episcopal letter, exhibits the best features of
Novatian's style, antithetic force, varied diction and
rhythm‚ and some play of fancy: while its austere
moral tone is what we should expect froin the leader

¹ Most noticeable in Laud rllaityr. cc, vii, xvi, xx, xxi, xxiii, Even
Cib. lad. has such Virgilianisrns as ‘arborum ietus' (v. Georg. i 55). In
v thecle Taiaitata we find ‘tantae mons) c. i, p. 6. 7 [cp. Aea. i 33)
and other instantes which are noted in Index ΠΙ. Harnack (ζ Eine hislrer
nicht erkannre Schnrr Novatian’s v. Jahre 249-250') pp. 26*33 gives
copious refl. to Georgia and deiviri, although, in the opinion of Amrnundsen,
Nyaatiaaus ag dbvatiaaisraea, p. ²7 note, he overstrains his point
2 The reference is to Zielinslri's canon oi the claasala or close of the
‘period' in the classical writers, the hest type being -ν- l —vor the saure
resolved: a. Classical Reaiarv, vol. xix, p. 164 (alr A. C. Clark). The
Laud. rilaatya constantly corifornrs to this. , .
3ορλ cle Tria. iii, p. 10, l. on. There is no doubt that there were.
more than two Old Latin versions: cp. Straiia Biblica (Oxiord) i on the
‘Corbey St James' The oldest may have been an Afra, or Latin version
ior the African Church, Greek having long rernained the speech of the
Roman Christians. Aug. de Daca». Car. ii 15 ‘in ipsis interpretationibus
Itala ceteris praeferatur, narn est uerborum tenacior curn perspicuitate sen·
tentiae? schini, aesca diui. Lai. iii, ἓ 772.

 

