xiv sumnonem

great intellectus] gista in spite of the expressed disap-
proval of the clergy and many of the laity1. ⁵
¹ From Cyprian we learn that Novatian had beena .
y follower of the Stoic philosophy; and we may trace its
l intluence in his partiality for the syllogism in argument,
'l as well as in his cos'mogony (cf de Trinitatis c. iii
f with notes; and de Spectaculis ix, if Novatian⁷s). It
is certain that by the year AD. 250 his abilities had
gained him a commanding position among the forty?
'lsix Roman presbyters. lt was in that year, when the
martyrdom of Fabian created a uacancy in the Roman
see, that we find a couple of letters² addressed ¹by
Novatian on behalf of the Roman clergy· to Cypriam
‘Bishop of Carthage, asking his counsel upon the vexed
5 question of the treatment of the ‘lapsed' ie. those who
under stress of the Decian persecution had sacrificed. Η
JIn both letters there is an austerity of tone in regard to “ ³
these offenders, not wholly unmerited in view of their
peremptory demand for indulgeneer The writer is
s none the less ready to ‘remit the case to the bislrop‚'
as soon as a successor to Fabian should be found, and
meanwhile to confer with bishops, priests, deacons,
confessors and faithful laity elsewhere upon this ques-
tion⁴. But perhaps some ruords at the opening of

1 opud Euseb, intr. Ercl. vi 43 κατηξιώθη τοῦ πρεσβυτερίου κατὰ χάριν
τοῦ ἐπισκόπου,
¹ 2Letters xxx and xxxvi in Cypr. Epistulae: in Migne, Parioi. iv,
col. 315 (nurnbered¹ xxxi), also ib. iii, col. 993, and ib. iv, col. 311 (uum-
hered xxx). The evidence for the authorship of xxxvi is not quite as strong
as that of xxx, for which Cypriun vouches (Ep. lv 5).
³Ep. xxx 7 ‘qui petitur flecti debet non incltari’= Ep. xxxvi 1 .
‘lapsorum fratrum immoderata petulantia usque ad periculosam uerborum ’ ¹
temeritatem producta’; ibv 3'‘neque sine instinctu quorundam ausuros
fnisse omnes tam petulanter sibi pacem uindicare) Cp. Ep. xxiii (Migne
xxii) 3. ’
⁴ xxxvi a senfin, xxx 6, 7 sul fin.

 

