rwrnobocrrorv xxvii

Tertullian (Virg. Vel. i, adn. Prae. i 16, ap. Swete,
ps 107), and in paraphrase in our texe.

In view of the important issues at stake, any evidence
= for the original form of the Roman Symbol is to be'
welcomed. Harnack holds that it was based upon ‘the r,
baptismal'formula and confessional formulas of a sum-
marising character...including Eastern formulas,’ and
originated about the middle os the second century. But
there are valid grounds for believing that it had its =
prototypes also in the East‚ baptismal (and Trinitarian)
confessions. Harnack will not admit their existence,
and yet there is evidence for thern which cannot be
hastily rejected: notably, the κανὼν τῆς ἀληθείας asso-
ciated by irenaeus with baptism2, and the περὶ πίστεως
γραφή (‘ received from the bishops before us ') laid by·
Eusebius of Caesarea before the Council of Nicaea in s
325· ’
The first section of the de Triru'tate relates to God
the Father (clrs. i-viii); the second to God the Son
(chs. ix—xxviii); the third section to ¹God the Holy
Ghost (ch. xxix). The last two chapters (xxx, xxxi)
form a complementary semion, setting forth the unity
of the Godhead especially as against Adoptianist and

against Patripassian heretics (of the school of Sabellius).

¹ Reasons are given for accepting ‘unum' in n. on c. ix, p. 28. ό.
The whole question of the presence of this word ‘One' in the original
· Roman Creed is a difficult one: Zahn supposes it was introduced on anti·
Gnostic grounds and afterwards omitted to counteract Monarchian teach·
ing; and Burn takes a similar view, holding also that Tertullian's Creed
probably contained ‘unum’ but that in that of Novatian it is missing (op.
cit. p. 58). Loofs (Symbalik i 6. 5) cannot decide: Harnach denies its
Ι presence in R (Apostles' Creed, Eng. tr. p. γὼ and doubtless its presence
there would strengthen the position of those who traee R back to Eastern
(perhaps Johannine) sources.

²Consult Lvofs, Symbolr'k i, ξ 5, on Oriental Baptismal Symbols of
the Ante-Nicene period.

 

