lxii rwrnonucrrow

But whatever ‘person' may have come to signify in
later thought, in the early writers ‘persona' is a term
simply chosen to indicate, forno human term could ex·
press, the distinctions in the Divine Essence which we call
the Trinity. So the standing formula in Tertullian is ‘una
substantia tres Personae'; and of baptism he says, ‘nec
semel, sed ter, ad singula nomina in Personas singulas
tinguimur¹ (adu, Pm. xxvi). On what principle was
this term chosen? That it was chosen with deliberation
we are certain: the early fathers were reluctant to go
beyond the letter of Scriptum, but the strange specula-
tions of the Gnostics compelled them to interpret and
comment, and formulate In the case of this particular
word, it was not necessary to do more than to refine
upon a usage already to he found, in a verbal way, in
2 Corinthi 11, ii 10, and perhaps iv 6, if the old Latin
versions gave ‘persona' as the equivalent of πρόσωπον
there. From the original sense of a rdle or character

in a play, the word persona came, in classical usage, to
denote a ‘type or representative or standing example'
of a class and even an ‘individual member' of a class¹.
Still more significant is its juristic use, to denote a sort ,
of legal abstraction: an individual or a corporation has,
in the sight of the law, a persona-a complex of certain
rights and duhest Hence, starting from this legal

¹ a. de Tria. xviii, p. 66, l. 6 ‘prophetes ex p. dei': and ib. p. 65, l. 1
‘p angeli’: xvi, p. 58, l. 4 ‘personarum et rerum omnium ordo.¹ Also
my 11. in Cic. pro Cluent.§ 59 (Longlnans). its first meaning, as a stage-
word, was ‘an actor’s mask.¹ ,

² Refer to a note on ‘persona’ πρόσωπον, by Mt Bethune·Balrer in
lets und Stadios, vol. vii (Cambridge, 1901), p. 70 sq.; who says ‘Itis
the condeio, statas, numm which any one has among men in general, and
in >particular in civil use. And so it is the man himself so sar as he has

this or that persona. Thus slaves, as not possessing any rights of citizen· .

ship‚ were regarded hy Roman law as not having persona: they were
ἀπρὸσωποι or persona carentes!

 

