rvaaoaucmorv xix

certitude. There are five treatises included among the
works of Cyprian which some leading scholars now
attribute to Novatian: the dc Spectaculis, dc Barca J
Pudicitiae, dc [doleiam Vanitatc, adccccsccs Iudaeas, and
dc Laccdc Mac‘tycii. Space sorbids meto enter into
the question here; but I should consider the author-
ship of Novatian proved for the dc Laccdc Martycii„
which (as Harnack says) was enough to establish the 7
vvriter’s fame as an orat0r1, just as the dc Trinitatc
establishes his sameas a theologiam and proved also for
the dc Spectaculis. The former is a letter to martyrs in ,
prison, the latter the letter of a bishop from his place ·
of exile to his adherents. In the tvvo treatises (the dc
Laadc Mactycii and a'c Spectaculis) we find the vvriter’s
old partiality for elaborate metaphora his use of hy-
perbaton³, of rhetorical formulas of transition and qualiss
fication43 and some of his characteristic ivords5.

His fine effects are often 'securcd by the use of

1 lt must be admitted that ior this very reason the dc Laude lir'artyrii
falls below the theologicai level of the vritcr's best work: there is too
apparent a straining aiter effect.

2Ελς. from wounds, dc Spar. i ‘sanitatis obductae cicatricem,’ Ep.
xxxvi 3, Ep. xxx 3 ‘obducere cicatricem: from the sea and its shores,

- dc aazia Macar. iv, 'comparing dc T ria. i, p. 3, ll. 2-7.

³ ug. dc T cia. v ‘ad hccraaacrum relata esse exempla uitiorum': de
Laced. Martia. xxi ‘iccius cuncta sunt temporis, unius poma feruntur
aestatis': dc Spar. v ‘si perrogem quc ad illud spectaculum itinere per-
uenerit)

⁴ Eg. dc speci. ii ‘hoc in loco nou immerito dixerim' vi ‘ut de hoc
scenae inquinamento,„transitum faeiam’: Cib, suc. ii ‘ut ab exordio...
incipiam’: Laud. ltffarlyc. xiv ‘atque ut transeam cuncta': de Tria. xxi
iaia, xxii init. z ‘ut ita dixerim,' dc Tria. vi, p. 19, l⁴ rouote.

⁵ Ecg. ‘cumulus' ‘crowu of completion,' Ep. xxx 6, Laud Martyc.
iv, xi: ‘praesta' dc Tria. xxiv, p. 89. 3, Lauri. Maiayc. vi, de Spect. i:
‘expedio' dc T cia. xxiv, p. 9⁰· 3, Laud. Martyr. iv, cic sacci. vi: ‘robur‚
rohustus,' Laud. Maciyr. viii, xvii, Cib. Iad. iii: ‘uigem uigor,’ cle Tria.
viii, p. 27. 3, dc Spect. i, Ep. xxx iaia, Ep. xxxvi iaia: substantives iu
‘mentum'passina

ba

 

